                    				Data Engineering Project Summary

Abstract:
Do momentum exists in sporting events? How closely are the various stats in different quarters in the same basketball games related to each other? 
This project attempts to present actual evidences in answering these questions, by examining two different stats, points scored and playing time, over the different quarters, in the same basketball game. 
It then examines how predictive linear models can be for these type of problems and issues to handle them.

Data:
The primary data are acquired through web scraping using basketball-reference.com. The data obtained cover all regular season games over 3 entire NBA seasons from 2016-2019, a total of 3690 games. 

For each season, the seasons schedule page is scrapped to come up a list of all games played in that season. For each game, there is a seperate web page, and the box score for each quarter are examined. The points scored, and playing time of the starting players and top reserves are recorded.  For each player that appeared in the game, their age, years drafted, and games played will be scrapped from a different player specific page. These formed the base data for the regression part of this project. 

Each game consists of one data point, so a total of 3690 data points are used.  

Points scored by the home team and points scored by the visiting team, in each quarters are recorded. Also, the top players of each team, in terms of minutes played in the game, are recorded. The age of each of those players, the total games played by the player, and the minutes played in each quarter are recorded as features. Including players on home team and visiting team, a total of 130+ features are included for each data point. 

 
Algorithms:
There are two sets of targets. The points scored in a quarter, and the playing time of a player. For each of these targets, both linear regression models, and polynomial models are employed to examine the possible relationships between features and targets.
For linear regression models, LASSO regularization, is employed to further evaluate the results. 
The polynomial models at degree 2, show a large negative R2 value for low regularization values. After apply LASSO() model on the polynomial terms, the maximum R^2 found is close to linear results, with some improvements. 
Since the total number of minutes played in a quarter by an entire team must adds up to 60 minutes, there could be a multi-colinearity issues when the playing time data. So only the playing time of the staring lineup are used, even though the playing time of up to 13 players are recorded. 

The regression results of points scored has a R^2 of essentially 0. The playing time showed a medium range R^2 value. The results are expected, as the points scored are widely known to be unpredictable. The playing time are heavily impacted by coaching decisions, and other in game situations, but a portion of patterns can still be learned from the data.  

From the Statsmodel output, we can examine the parameters with coefficients that is statistical significant. If these paramters also appears in LASSO models selected from cross validations, they are examined to do an interpretation. The interpretation results are shown in the figures in the presentations. 

At first, only the playing time of the previous quarter are looked at as the features. Then playing time for all previous quarters, and not just the preceeding quarters are examined. This improves the results for certain cases, especially for the third quarter results. And finally, the games played are added as additional features to examine the change in R^2, this improved predictive results for the fourth quarter.

WE can see the change in R^2, and examine the change in coefficients for interpretations.

Tools:

The web scraping is using BeautifulSoup, 
After data is acquired, linear regression models, with regulation, are used to examine the data. Polynomial terms are also examined to see its impact on the linear regression.

StatModels are used to examine the resulting parameters's statistical significance.


Results:
1. The playing time model has a R2 around 0.1 to 0.3, depending on the position and quarter played. Most of the times, a player's playing time, has positive coefficient with his teammate's playing time in the proceeding quarter, and a large negative coefficient with his own playing time, in the preceeding quarter. 

The implication is fatigue is a major factor. This relationship is weaker in the third quarter, which has a long half time break. This further strengthens the fatigue interpretation. 

The player experience has little impact on the model, until the model is applied to the fourth quarter. Adding player experience to the feature set improves the fourth quarter results, while having no impact to results from other quarters. 

2. The playing time in a quarter is bound to a lower limit of 0, and an upper limit of 720 seconds. This bounds limit the usefulness of linear models. The pairplot indicates the distribution of playing time has a normal like curve, except the tail of the distribution collapse into a single value at 720 seconds. A large variance of the prediction is due to the inability to match this bounded condition. 

A different model like decision tree needs to be utilized to handle such bounded condition better.

3. Based on the results, the linear regression has low R2 values for the points scored as the target value. R2 is in range of 0.02. 

Within the features, the t values from statmodels indicated that only one term is statistical significant. The point scored by one  team, is positivly co-related to the points scored by the other team in the proceeding quarters. 

This result in point differential has a negative correlation quarter over quarter, or a regress to mean. 




